You're dying less frequently.
That's progress. Exactly. Much improvement.
Oh, you feel feeling better? It's a killer.
Are you feeling better? I am, but um, this cough is here.
Yeah. Lingering. Okay. Right. Okay.
We've got Sarah. I don't think we have Sarah.
Oh, we don't have Sarah. Am I correct? Nice up.
Yes, you are. First up now.
Well, first up, first ups not here, so you, you'll, you'll,
you are up, up next.
So welcome. Look. Um,
thank you very much, uh, for your submission.
You can take your submission as read, um,
and, uh, we've got you down for five minutes.
Uh, so if you wanna leave time
for questions, we always appreciate that.
So I will tell you when you've got two minutes to go.
So, you know that and, um, the, the time I can't is yours.
Can't borrow the other person who didn't turn up on,
Sorry, I can't borrow the other person
who didn't turn up on.
We have to be No, no. Well, you,
because what we don't know is whether they'll turn up later
on and then we go, oh, we're way behind.
So anyway, in your hands,
Um, um,
I'm a Maori development strategist
and have held a number of, uh, governance roles,
including being the chair of Pad Trust that negotiated
the settlement back in 2019.
Um, I've been a iwi representative on the Taranaki Regional
Council Transport Committee,
and, uh, to name a few other organizations
that I've been a board member trustee of.
And I'm presently a director of a hapu owned enterprise.
And, uh, working in the oil
and gas sector, um, I bring both professional
and lived experience and land acquisition treaty justice
and infrastructure planning.
So, um, for Maori, uh,
these aren't just abstract policy settings.
They're deeply embedded in our history, future generation.
So I'll talk quickly to the three key issues
that are presented in my written submission.
One, I think, um,
the bill is presently undermining natural justice.
Uh, the bill removes the right to object
to the environment court
and replaces it with the submission only process, uh,
that strips away.
The ability for whanau to be heard is face to face,
to eng, engage in cross-examination,
and to bring a ANA based approach to dispute resolution.
My recommendation is to reinstate the right
of oral hearings, especially when Maori land is effective.
Second is the inadequate protection for UA Maori.
The bull excludes only, um,
protected Maori land from the accelerated
acquisition process.
Uh, but this definition is too narrow
and leads many forms of UA Maori vulnerable.
My recommendation is to expand our protection
to include all Maori owned
or collectively held land consent, not consultation
must be the threshold.
And lastly, the coercive use of compensation payments.
The 92,000
and 150,000 early agreement bonuses,
from my perspective, are form of pressure, particularly
for communities without legal planning support.
So my recommendation is to remove these early bonuses
and replace with a transparent fair compensation process
negotiated in good faith.
So in conclusion, to me, this bill
accelerates infrastructure investment,
but essentially, as it sits now at the cost of Maori rights
and justice, I urge the committee to pause the bill,
restore oral hearing rights, protect all Maori
and partnership into planning.
There's
speed does not correct or wrong.
Got it. Cam, Uh, thank you for submission.
Well thought out and got some recommendations there.
I just, I wanted one clarification.
Um, what is the definition of, uh, uh, Maua
Maua ma land?
Like how would you define it, um, in your,
Um, well, you know, I'm more than willing
to provide in future sun written examples,
but we are talking about, um, you know,
presently Maori land owners fall
outside the current definition.
Those, including those with Fender ua, under incorporations
UA trusts, um, or multiple ownership.
I, myself have just gone
through a succession planning process for both my parents
and that of my recently deceased husband for my children.
So I wanna know that my, who I'm doing is future proofing
for, in terms of their access to Maori land.
Those rights are protected, um, as Maori,
we support infrastructure
and as I, you know, from my, uh, background,
but it must not, it must be built on
partnership, not just possession.
I think we will get some clarity on
exactly what is covered wants.
So just any other questions that we
Got? One? Yeah.
Thank you Ms. Thank you for your submission.
Um, earlier today, we, we also heard about the removal
of the rights of appeal.
Um, I take it though, from your submission is, is
that the issue that you have is, it's not having that,
so it doesn't really matter who might be making the
decision, whether it's a minister,
a different minister seeking advice
or what have you, it's the face-to-face ability
to come together, understand sort of the issues of concern.
Is, is that a correct assumption?
Yeah, I mean, um, when they say that
object, uh, objections from, um, are minor,
they're not minor, they're grounded in ancestral connection.
And that means about, so for Maori visibility,
who sits there and talks on behalf
of us is a critical part of it.
And that's where they, the people who come
and represent that UA have the authority to speak on the wha
related to that ua.
And that is really important to give transparency
and visibility to that.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I really appreciate you coming in for Thank you. Thank you.
Right now I've got, so we don't have Sarah still? Uh, no.
No. Okay. Right.
Uh, we've got
TT yep.
They're in the zone. Right? Okay. Right
Kia.
So Just, just before you start, just
before you start, we've got you down for five minutes.
Um, so, um, I'll give you a call about two minutes.
Uh, we've got, um, what, seven of us
around the table, uh, to hear you.
Um, and we do like to questions if you leave us any time.
Thank you.
Uh, just the other speaker, the relationship
between treaty partner obliges the Crown to actively protect
Maori interest, uh, for myself,
had personal experience along with my family
and, uh, the public works act in regards to the,
to power development scheme in 1963,
where basically we made all the decisions on our land.
By 1964, we had zero decision making.
So the, the
and wellbeing of our people were basically crushed, uh,
in, in doing so.
One example I would like to share was, uh,
they decided to build a road.
And, and of course, this is a blank, this is township.
Uh, they decided to build a road right through an dupa,
right through a, a cemetery.
And, uh, and there was a play mate of Wellington.
They didn't realize that there was a hill there that was,
that had the, the people working at the time.
Um, the developers at the time said that there were
that many human bones we didn't know which was human
or which was animal, basically, um, uh,
with the last speaker, you need to ensure that the spiritual
and wellbeing is, is taken into account.
We need to ensure that Maori interest, uh,
at land are protected as, uh, ang, uh, says
that we need to.
And so, um, I'm imp applauding you all to, uh, not fail
as you did with my people in 1963,
the time you took over our township
Kiara. Questions.
Kiara, thank you very much. And thank you
for giving us time for, for questions,
uh, questions, colleagues.
Look, I I'm gonna ask one.
So the, the bill as it is, uh, basically says that the one,
the one sort of land that cannot just be taken, well, sorry,
nothing had just be taken,
but, uh, for all land other than protected Maori land, um,
the, the right of appeal effectively goes or,
or contesting it goes to the minister.
Um, at the moment, under the bill says,
for protected Maori land, it still stays with the ability
to go and take it to the environment court.
The land you are talking about in that situation,
would I presume, have been protect Maori land?
Uh, no, not at the no time.
Uh, so yeah, we, we, it was a store blanket land.
So, well, what we need to ensure is that at least
that when there are works done, whether they're Maori land
or not, because land at the moment, we dunno the history
of the land and the infrastructure just happens.
So for an example,
a cultural impact assessment will be a vital piece of work
that could help, uh, ensure that we're, we're, we're, uh,
looking not only after the environmental,
but also the cultural, um, the cultural impacts
that could potentially happen.
And from our experience, it does happen. So.
Okay. Look, thank you. Any other questions, anyone?
No, it looks like you'd be very, very clear
and we really appreciate that.
Well, thank you for your time.
Thank you for yours too. Thank you.
Got it right.
We have, now I'm the
tribal authority next.
Is that right? Just on the zoom. Sorry.
So who's in, who's in Zoom? Just arrived.
Sorry, Jason's just arrived on the Zoom. Yep. Okay, cool.
Yep. Tribal authority. Yes.
Jason
Killed.
Yep. Um, as an organization, we've got you down there for,
for, uh, 10 minutes.
Uh, just, you can take your submission as read,
but anything you wanna highlight, if that is, is all good.
Um, yes, there was time for any questions.
We always appreciate that.
I'll let you know when you've got about, um, uh,
when you've got about, say, say three or four minutes left.
Cool. Cool. Alright. Thank you very much.
Over to you. Cool. Awesome. Um, killed everybody.
Great to be here. Um, as the p Daco representative, um,
you would've received, uh, as you said, the, um,
written document in respect of our, um, submission.
So let me just get to it.
Um, just on our behalf, just want to register our firm, um,
opposition to the bill.
Um, the p Daco Tribal Authority firmly opposes the, uh,
public works critical infrastructure amendment Bill
as currently drafted.
We think and believe it poses a significant risk
to Maori land, property rights, environmental protections,
uh, and also underpinning that the, uh, integrity
of the Treaty of Waitangi.
Now, that's a significant point to raise here at this point,
um, at the beginning, um,
because the integrity of our treaty settlement, um,
which was granted its third
and final reading into the house just five weeks ago.
Um, and over the last five seven days, um,
it has received the Royal ascent.
It's a hapu centric settlement.
Um, and it wasn't entered into sort of willy-nilly,
and it certainly did not provide the government with,
in our view, a wholesale opportunity, um,
to unwind in our view the solemn intent
just days, literally
after receiving Royal Ascent from the Governor General.
Um, and so that underpins, I guess, um, the firm opposition
to, uh, the bill Key concerns, um, our view,
it doesn't fully uphold, uh, to,
or the principles of partnership protection, uh,
and participation.
The three Ps. Uh, it also undermines the intent
of treaty settlements, as I've alluded to earlier,
including those for the nui that, that, uh, connects
to Nui.
Uh, the bill in our view accelerates land, um, acquisition,
uh, for critical infrastructure by replacing the right
to object in the environmental court, uh,
with a written submission to ministers or local authorities.
Um, and our view, it reduces independent oversight and
therefore weakens, uh, due process.
And that's really critical to understand there.
Uh, from our perspective, uh,
while protected Maori land is excluded from the accelerated
process, it can still be acquired, uh,
under the Standard Public Works Act.
Now that means the last 5%
of UA Maori remains, um, at risk.
That is really important to understand from our context
because, uh, the Public Works Act, um, in our view, um,
and as, uh, previous tribunal reports have found,
uh, was solely responsib responsible for acquiring
large tracks of land that reside in our territory, excluding
outside of the, um, of the confiscation process, our view,
uh, the Public Works Act acted as,
or, um, confiscation by the quill or the pen.
Um, and we know that
because our treaty settlement, uh, negotiated
with the crown, which they apologized for, uh,
quite frankly, um,
not less than five days, uh, five weeks ago.
It seems at odds with that apology, um,
delivered in the house.
And also, um, to us, uh, personally, um, at our,
at the battleground of Ana, um,
the impact on democracy and rights.
Uh, removing the right to object to the environmental court
environment court rather, is a major constitutional change.
Um, undermining, uh, property rights, uh, natural justice
are two key components there.
Uh, the new process, uh, in less, in less is less,
uh, transparent shortens timeframes limits meaningful
participation, uh, especially for those less resourced.
Um, the judicial review is not adequate in our view,
and it, um, it's not a substitute, uh, for independent,
uh, court oversight.
It's really important to understand
that from our perspective.
Uh, the Maori, uh, fourth one, Maori land
and treaty obligations.
The bill continues, uh, the historic pattern
of Maori land loss, um, potentially
and fails to guarantee genuine, uh, partnership, uh,
or collective consent.
Tarzi or Wang must be central, uh, compulsory.
Um, sy um, compulsory acquisition of any Maori land
with a protected general
or return through settlement should absolutely be prohibited
and protected without free, uh, prior, uh, in the absence
of free prior
and, um, informed consent, the bill replaces,
uh, the bill risks rather repeating past
injustices, um,
and undermines the Crown's Treaty obligations.
Once again, there's a recurring theme here in our view, um,
environmental and community risks.
The bill prioritizes, roading, transport projects,
sidelining, broader infrastructure needs
and environmental safeguards.
We know that because, uh, one of the roads, um,
that is deemed of national significance runs straight
through, uh, the middle of our tribal, um,
estate, in our view.
Well, no, it does. Absolutely it does.
Um, and this bill, um,
undermines some of those safeguards.
Katana must be core, uh, criteria
for any infrastructure, uh, development.
Now, we know katana forms one of the principles
of the treaty ang as well.
Um, so that shouldn't be a foreign
or odd concept, uh, for the bureaucracy to understand,
uh, transparency and public trust.
The government's, uh, practice
of releasing heavy redacted documents
for public consultation.
Once again, our view undermines transparency,
transparency and public trust.
Genuine informed participation is impossible without access
to full, um, information.
So, um, wrapping up fairly quickly, the recommendations pu
um, we call for the following, the bill, uh, is an amendment
to the Public's Work Act works act,
and the RMA we want to call on the government to be bold,
um, and to put an end to the acquisition acquisition of all
UA Maori under any process end of the redaction,
of documents for public submissions.
Full transparency, our view is essential.
Restore the right to object to the environmental court, uh,
for all landowners, uh, require free prior
informed collective consent for any acquisition
of Maori land strengthening environmental safeguards.
Uh, once again, that's another issue.
Um, uh, another one for us is, uh, broaden the build scope
to include a wider range of in infrastructure needs.
And the last one is, is
to ensure regular independent review, uh,
and public reporting, um, on the impacts
of the accelerated, uh, process.
So in conclusion, uh, the bill must
and our view be fundamentally amended
to restore transparency, uphold property rights,
protect all UA Maori, strengthen environmental safeguards
and ensurer, uh,
or is central to all decision making.
Um, only through, uh, genuine partnership
and robust legal protections, uh, can New Zealand,
uh, move forward, uh, justly.
So that's it, uh, in a nutshell for us.
Um, yeah, that's where it sit for us. Back to the committee.
Thank you very much, Jason.
We've got a couple of minutes left.
Cam, you've got a question, Jason.
Um, thank you for, for being here and somebody on,
and you are right, the, the, uh, the, so the na
uh, NAI settlement was only read a couple of weeks ago. Um,
And thank you for your contribution to that
And, and your, yeah, thank, thank you Jess.
And your, your, your uhhi, uh, KO's area there at,
um, by river is a high growth
area in New Zealand at the moment.
Lots of people want to live in this area.
Um, so acknowledging all of that, um, my question
that I would really like to, to hear an answer to, um, is,
is how would you define,
how would you actually classify all Maori land under
general Title I?
I mean, it's, it, that would be a good
definition for this committee to hear.
Yeah. So land under general title
is land under general title.
It, it, it belongs to whoever owns it.
That falls outside our scope Maori land, um,
that falls within Maori title.
Um, in our, in our, in our view, um, ought to be protected.
Um, that's not to say
that we don't have an interest in land in general
title as well.
Um, land, uh, that's held by the Crown.
Um, we believe, um, if there is to be any semblance
of, uh, not just consultation,
but if we are to believe that the, the, uh, pretty much
what you said at the, um, at the, uh, settlement, you know,
if we're sitting down as grownup adults, uh,
having a discussion about the effects of, for example, um,
the stage two roading out out,
which falls firmly in our area, that we have to sit down
and have these discussions in a grownup adult way
that doesn't impact on the sanctity
of this treaty settlement that we signed
with the government, as you know,
not less than five weeks ago.
Okay. All good. Uh,
we've only got about five seconds left,
so I won't start another question,
but thank you very much Jason.
Really appreciate what you've had, what you've had to say.
Cool. Thanks Jason. Right.
Okay, because we have our next submitter online, uh,
so vea Vena Edwards,
Uh, Kira Tinana,
Um, we've got you, we've got your submission here.
Um, so take that as read. We've got you for five minutes.
Um, if you wanna leave any time
for questions, always appreciate that.
I'll let you know when there's two minutes to go.
Just so you know, uh, for your timekeeping purposes
and, uh, in your hands,
RA Dr.
Avani Edwards ho,
I present the submission as a concerned Maori woman
grounded in our collective responsibility to protect
the bill, despite its title is not about infrastructure
for me and my whanau, it's about dispossession dressed up
as bureaucratic language.
We are told to, uh, it will streamline processes.
And what it does is it steamrolls over Maori
land rights again.
Um, it allows compulsory acquisition
of Maori freehold land under the fast track approvals
regime, a system
that prioritizes crown convenience over 10 Oranga.
And let's be clear, efficiency is not an excuse for
Article two guarantees us undisturbed possession of our,
of our lands and Tonga, this bill undermines
that there is no credible evidence
of proper Maori consultation, let alone cosign.
A ministerial sign off is not a partnership,
it's a tick box exercise.
Um, we are seeing this patent
before the Aropa two of the 1860s
and taking under the public work last century.
What's changed? Nothing except the branding.
Maori land is not commodity.
It is wha it is una and identity.
You cannot compensate intergenerational
trauma with market rates.
The bill continues the trauma and it must be stopped.
I make four key recommendations, reject the bill entirely
unless Maori involved, um,
in true code design from the beginning, remove the clause,
allowing compulsory acquisition of Maori land
without free prior and informed consent.
Create an independent Maori led oversight body
to review the infrastructure proposals impacting maua
al fast tracking powers until treaty
or compliant protections are properly in place,
the crown cannot keep legislating over Maori while
claiming on a partnership.
So, um,
Got, thank you.
Uh, questions?
No, not at all.
Um, so look, can I ask two questions then?
One, the first one of 'em is, so the, the,
there is a special ring fencing for, um,
protective Maori land in the bill, as you know.
Um, just I'd be interested in your understanding
of what that means.
In other words, that that would still go
through the environment court as opposed
to simply going to the minister.
Um, the second, the second one is if there is, you know, in,
I mean obviously it becomes very much a last resort,
but if there is a situation where a piece of critical,
and I use that word critical infrastructure, requires to go
through piece of, um,
Maori land cannot go anywhere else, what do we do with that?
Well, I think to both, um, there's a lack of trust
in regards to this current coalition.
So I, I am basically
what I'm saying is the bill feels like it's recycling
historical injustices in regards
to Maori Wrights and Maori land.
We can't be certain because of the lack of trust.
So, you know, um, just everything that's been steamrolling,
like, you know, fast track, everything's steam rolling.
Um, I assert at the end of the day that um,
you know, I suppose we don't have co-design,
we don't have true partnership, we don't have protection.
And how do we trust you?
Because it's just, just like, I mean, I'm from,
and you know, all those,
although we have large, we had large scale land loss,
we had breach of cultural economic impacts, you know,
and I mean, I know it was all part of the claim,
but it was only a small percentage what we got back,
you know, it was, yeah, just,
just can't trust you.
Well, on that note, yeah, thank you.
Um, right, okay. Thank you.
We haven't met before, so, um, that's good start.
No, that's a good start.
I'll tell you what though, you know,
I'm hoping this is a one term government
and we can undo, unravel all of the stuff
that you've created because it's an impact not only on Papa
two and KU and, and everything else that's into,
into connected all for, um, you know,
commodity and economic.
Thank you for your, have a great,
We accept everybody has different
political views, so, but thank you.
Have a great tomorrow 'cause it could.
Yep. Thank you Vin. Thank you.
Right. Okay.
We have John McDonald worry time.
Sorry, is that first time you met be Yes.
Alright. John is on Zoom as well. Yes.
Yep. Lisa,
Many link to Alvin's, Dr. Edwards.
Um, link is broken in. I think
I replaced this ly.
You're working. Okay. Alright. John,
You up?
Hello John. We can hear you
but we cannot see you at the moment.
Alright, now we can. Right? Okay, cool.
Um, we've got you down for,
um, thank you for your submission.
We've got you down for five minutes.
You can take your submission as read,
but if you want to highlight bits, that's all good.
I'll let you know when there's two minutes to go.
Uh, just in, in terms of, uh, making time
for questions if you wish to allow for that.
Thank you very much in your hands.
Uh, so I have serious concerns about this bill, uh,
about a giving the executive branch
of government the ability
to take land in a non-consensual fashion by
what is effectively executive decree.
So it sounds like this has put the hands of the minister
and also put into the hands of chief executives
of local government authorities.
Um, as much as a question is anything else,
is this bill limited
to just the projects currently in Schedule two A
or is there a scope for a future government to
pass an amendment in parliament
and add extra projects to schedule two A?
The bill seems to be ambiguous.
Some clauses indicate that it's just for those projects
and other clauses indicate there's scope for it
to be become a new normal of taking land
by executive decree without the ability
to get your day in court, um, to contest that decision.
Decision. Um, I agree with the previous submitter in terms
that Article two of the Treaty of Yang,
he does guarantee undisturbed possession,
but I would argue that that's a wider right.
Going back into British law and constitutionally protected.
Um, I've cited the International Covenant on civil
and political rights since I view that as reaffirming some
of those ancient, um, constitutional rights, um,
that we should be treated equally before the law.
And, um, we should be able to appear
before a competent, independent,
and impartial tribunal established by law, um,
to work out our rights and obligations.
Um, and we should be protected from arbitrary interference
in our families
and our homes, which could be in jeopardy if your
family home is in the way of one of these, um,
fast tax projects
and we should have protection from the law from that.
Um, in terms of the equality
before the law, I have concerns about public-private
partnerships and that some of our utility, um,
infrastructure is now partially in the hands
of for-profit entities, potentially foreign influence.
Um, so if they're partnering with the executive branch
of the state in a public private partnership
or some similar arrangement, are they going to be able
to get, be given preferential powers
and, uh, position of inequality in terms
of them having the power to use the executive branch
of government to seize land for their for-profit
or rent, rent seeking activities.
Um, so I can see the family home or the family farm
or some hanau land ending up in the way of one
of these projects and it turns out it's gonna be a road
with congestion charges on it or New Toll Road
and a Canadian pension fund
or BlackRock will be wanting that for rent seeking behavior.
So is it actually, uh, public work if there's a
for profit entity benefiting from it?
And I think most of my other concerns,
We've got two minutes to Jock.
Yeah, if you wanna ask any questions.
Okay, cool. Are are there any questions?
It doesn't appear that there are any. Okay.
Um, you just,
you asked one question, which
I I will ask that one question.
You asked, what was the scope to add to
the current Schedule two A projects?
Um, and then you said
that the future parliament could add those when future
parliaments, we can't bind what future parliaments will do.
Um, and that if that has to go
through a legislative process, then they have to be, again,
go through the, the process of submissions, et cetera,
unless it's under urgency, et cetera.
But but is that not some say, yeah.
So I'm, You'd have to actually
change the law to do, I'm
Worried, I'm worried about the precedent it sets
because you're setting a precedent that it's basically
by executive decree and the minister
or the chief executive
of council has a strong conflict of interest.
Um, they might offend,
offend their bosses if they turn down a project in favor
of small mom and pop farm out there.
So yeah, the current bill, I understand
that without going through Parliament,
they can modify the projects in Schedule two A,
but they can't add a new project as the bill's written.
But the concern I have is
that once you've got this in a precedent,
the next government comes along, they've got a list
of 12 PET projects,
and under urgency they say, we'll take your amendment
and they'll add their 12 projects onto it.
Um, so if you are sure about this, you'd add that it's just
for those projects, you'd be definitive that Schedule two A
can't be amended and there's a sunset clause that the bill
disappears or, um, gets repealed or something.
Once all those fast track,
current fast track projects are approved.
So this doesn't become the new normal.
That with 10 days a no, a quite aggressive notice
with which says you need to respond with 10 days,
you could lose your home
or your business by executive decree is
Not Okay. John, new normal
Country.
John, thank you. That's very, very clear.
We appreciate that, appreciate
your time, appreciate the suspicion.
Thanks John. Thank you. Okay.
We now have, uh, the New Zealand initiative in person.
Bryce, are you are hiding behind there? Yes, I'm,
Thank you. And we
might have, uh, my colleague Nick, uh, Clark on,
uh, the Zoom he's down on. Oh,
Okay. Right. Okay. So
that's fine.
Well, we've got you down as an organization.
We have you down for 10 minutes.
Uh, you can take your submission as read,
but if you wanna highlight some things, thank you.
I know it's thoughtful as always.
Um, so, uh, appreciate what you've got to say to us.
And then, you know, I'll, I'll tell you four minutes, uh,
when, so, you know, yeah,
Yeah, I want make time. Okay.
And you're fine. So thank you very much Mr.
Chairman, for the opportunity to present to our submission.
Um, we, we in the initiative support, uh, this initiative,
we see the necessity for it.
Uh, but we regret that it's necessary
and we think it's very important to look at the safeguards.
And we've made a few suggestions in our submission as to
how things might be strengthened a little bit.
And one of our strongest recommendations is, is
to suggest the committee consider a sunset clause,
say five years after which the provisions would expire
and come out of the Public Works Act,
because hopefully by then these backlog projects,
which have become critical, will be,
will be largely approved and underway
and the land taken from.
So the sunset clause is the big one.
The, the first one is the compensation one.
Uh, we agree with the principal Linville
that if you're taking someone's property without their
permission and consent, I'm at a market price,
then a a bit extra is the decent thing to do.
We, we suggest that the a hundred, 150,000 cap is a bit
of rough justice when you take the different property values
in Auckland and else into account.
So we suggest you give consideration just to make it a,
a percentage above the market value
and so not cause those, you know, complaints
and feelings of an injustice on procedural fairness.
I think other speakers have been saying this,
we do think it puts some minister in an invidious position
if they sort of get a complaint about the decision they've
made and then have the responsibility
for being the judge in their own cause.
So we suggest, um, consideration,
therefore a different body to appeal, to appeal to that.
And that will seem fear, fear
to the person making the complaint
and the minister will be in a less difficult position.
Um, the third one is, um, just as always
as we always say, um, a supporting cost benefit analysis
to make the case for what it is
to be a compulsory acquisition.
So the individual who's it's going to be taken from,
and the public can see that, um,
it's fairly argued they can contest the argument.
Of course you always can,
but they can see that it's reasoned and, um, and rational.
And then, um, we suggest, um, strengthening the,
the abilities for lack of authorities to wa doubt
of these more restrictive fast track measures,
which take away some of people's,
or d delete some of people's appeal rights.
So if the local government doesn't really think it, it has
to go through this fast track thing, then it can go
through the normal public work procedures.
So we, we just suggest wait ways of making the presumption
that you don't do fast track a little bit stronger.
And, um, yeah, the,
the final the final one though is just really
to commend the focus,
and I hear it from these other speakers I've been listening
to on the importance of protecting property rights,
a presumption in favor of it due process,
followed if you take it,
and fee compensation, which is, it relates to market value.
And I see that has been quite a strong focus on the
development of this bill.
We applaud that and all we're doing here is
suggesting a few more tweaks. So thank you very much,
Mr. Chair. Michelle.
Okay.
We'll start over with Juliana and then we, um,
thank you very much for that helpful submission.
Um, I was wondering about the recommendation
and the written submission to provide
for an independent panel appointed
by the Chief Justice rather than ministers
to review the submissions.
Could you just speak more to why
that would be recommended and important?
It's not a strong opinion about that.
It has to be those people
and it's not something we consulted legal expertise on.
So it was a suggestion to keep the ball rolling,
to get the ball rolling as to an alternative
for what might be done.
But, um, I'm not going to sit here
and say we, we've checked this
with authoritative people. Right,
Right. No, but um,
I mean I guess the point would be that would
provide for more, um,
clear like fairness Yeah.
And was at arm length from politicians and ministers.
Yes, that's right. Justice needs to be seen to be done.
Yeah.
Cam, Uh, thank you.
I had a question about regulatory takings,
which you put in a broader context.
Being taking of, uh,
property rights away while keeping title in place.
Do you think that there's some way that, uh, that, um,
we could do, we could add amendments to a bill, um, to do
with the Public Works Act to talk about
what could be regulatory takings when land is zoned
differently or, um, other things happen
that diminish the value of one's land?
I think The Public Works Act is good on as it stands,
um, and it's been good since about 1,901 since
the first one came in.
It's got a betterment principle in it
and it's got, um, consideration for partial takings loss
of business, uh, income and that on the way.
Um, the big problem we've got as a country, I think is
that the RMA set itself out with section 85
where it completely went from all that
and said, no compensation will be considered,
and hence sort
of the unaffordable housing property we've got.
So that's the big fight going on at the market
and the regulatory standards bill
where submissions are doing it on Monday.
And, um, there we're having this mass op opposition
to greater clarity
and specification of the property rights clause.
Yeah. And it's quite amazing to me here that some
of the people who opposing,
I also found that rather Opposing this from flipping
me on the other side.
They, they, they don't want the loosening
of property riots here,
but they don't want the regulator standard bill.
So get a more principled approach.
You, you good Cam? Okay. Yeah. Thank
You. Uh, thank you Dr. Wilkinson.
Um, in your recommendations, you talk about enhance
and the compensation, have you given much stored into,
you know, the, the relative price, uh, caps
that we should consider for, you know,
you mentioned different ones from Auckland in particular.
Any recommendations there in terms of,
Uh, as to what the percentage should be?
Um, we, we've cite I think Richard Epstein
and the, the, the American guru, the,
the constitutional lawyer is saying 10 to 20%.
It's, it's not a hard figure though.
I, I don't know that there's any scientific basis
for setting that.
Two questions for me. The first one I'm just, in terms of
that independent review, so what you're saying is you,
you've made a suggestion about an independent panel,
but what you're basically saying is you think there should
be some way without going through the, the more, um,
time consuming process that the Environment Court will be,
but you think there be should be someone Oh, yeah.
Which is not the minister Yeah.
Being the decision maker,
well being the essentially potentially the
applicant and the decision maker. Yeah,
I agree. We want to avoid
that.
I mean, the whole thing's about getting these projects going
without going round and round the circles of the courts.
So, um, yeah.
Uh, as I say, I haven't put a lot
of thought into the design,
but I, I think you de you definitely want an appeal
authority, I think, which saves the minister from
that British position,
but is expeditious, um, you know, the,
the regulatory standards boards being set up, um, to, to try
and be quite a fast decision making thing on appeals.
Cool. And in the, and in the,
and if I can just add in the fast track, um, uh,
act these expert panels which make the decisions on those
projects, so having a consistent approach for this, this,
um, this sort of, these fast tracked part of Works act
consideration should be taken for, for that as well.
Well, and the Fast Track Act started off with,
or the Fast Track Act bill started off with, um,
ministers making decisions
and that's, so they moved away from that.
Okay. And look, the second one is just the process.
So to, to decide that a particular road is wanted, okay,
so we've got a particular road wanted,
but to actually decide on the route
and the, um, there's got to be an options process
and designation process
before you get to the point of saying, okay,
we wanna acquire bit this
bit, this bit and this bit of land.
Um, is that the key area that you see in terms of
protesting against a, um, somebody wanting
to acquire your land?
Is that the key area of decision?
'cause once you've decided the road's gotta go there, then
you know, it's quite clear which pieces of land,
but that decision as to which piece, which route is chosen,
which option is chosen.
Is that the key area of do you,
did you would see a debate also?
There's obviously, there, there's the issue, sorry.
There's also the issues around around o other land,
which is affected by,
might might not be actually on the alignment of the road,
but you know, are affected by it.
Uh, you know, I think those debates should be done
by the engineers and their advisors, the costings
and the complexity of the land and the difficulties.
Um, the, the, the Public Works Act issue comes in
where it's got be a compulsory acquisition
or where you go out
and start saying to people, um, want,
we want to buy you land?
Can we, we prefer to do a voluntary transaction.
We've got an assessed market value.
Are you happy to sell it for this?
There's another issue, which related issue,
which here at Crampton sort of emphasizes that, um,
if the roading authority say it's a road, it goes, uh,
as making their plans, they go out and buy the land
or an option on the land as soon as possible.
And then the roading authority gets the benefit
of the enhancement
and the value of the land, which is going
to come from better access to the surrounding land.
So, uh, part of that planning process you're talking about,
about which road it is
and what are the costs are affected by what you're going
to have, the scarcity value for land, how much you have
to pay, but, um, developing options
and it could be, Could be done.
Right. Thank you very much. Okay. Thank you very much.
Really appreciate your time. Really
appreciate the thought you've put into this.
Thank you. Very thank you. All the thank you. Right.
Uh, thank you. We've got now, um,
infrastructure New Zealand else.
Right? Okay.
Because e um, eco are not, um, not gonna be with us today.
They're gonna be with us on Monday.
Right. Okay.
So again, you can take the submission as read,
but, um, if you wanna highlight any,
any bits we've got you down for, for 10 minutes.
And, um, I'll let you know when there's four minutes to go
if, if you haven't already finished,
we're already had questions.
Yeah, no problem. Thank you very much for your time.
Um, it's great to have the opportunity,
uh, to speak to our submission.
Uh, we fully support the amendments.
Uh, in fact, actually we would like to REIT reiterate again
that a full review of the Public Works Act 1981,
um, is still required.
We, we still think that's needed going forward,
but it's great that these amendments, um, are being, um, put
through, uh, to look at the critical infrastructure.
Um, those on the past track list
and the, um, Ron's, uh,
we support replacing the environment
court, uh, objection process.
Um, our biggest concern, uh, at the moment is the delays,
but also the reiteration, um,
and duplication of the RMA processes, the designation
and consenting processes being re-litigating
again, um, at that stage.
So we think this is a positive step to streamlining
and preserving the fairness to, um, acknowledge situation
for, uh, effective landowners.
Um, they haven't come as willing partners to this process,
uh, and often have, uh,
a real attachment to their properties.
And I think the enhanced compensation, um, goes some way
to acknowledging that, um, as well as the market processes,
uh, to try and encourage voluntary sales as much
as process as possible.
Um, and to reduce the, um, appeals to
that is really a factor in holding up a lot
of infrastructure projects.
Um, we think the incentives, um, to
richer early settlement, um, are good.
It's a step in the right direction.
We do think they should be, um, indexed though, um,
as we've seen over time.
Um, the, the value of these can reduce.
We do agree with their treatment of NARI land also, um,
and think that that should be excluded,
but open to the compensation, um, uh, um,
provisions as well.
Um, we do know a problem, um, has been, uh,
delays arising from strategic holdouts,
particularly when there's a rising property market
and, um, some owners
and the legal representatives have sought
to frustrate the process
to seek another evaluation six months down the track too.
So I think, um, there should be some way of, um, reaching,
um, agreements sooner.
Um, hopefully these incentives will, um, um, help to, to,
um, succeed in that way.
Uh, I think the monitoring of the legislation amendments,
um, if they're implemented is a really positive, um, process
and we really support that to actually see how, um,
this is impacting.
Um, one problem that we also, um, reiterate again,
and it's probably something for the wider review
of the Public Works Act, is the problem with, um,
a requiring authority, um, purchasing land for one purpose
transport, but actually particularly in the urban
environment, um, the residual land would be perfect
for urban redevelopment regeneration.
And the, um, using of that for a different purpose and,
and passing on to the other, other council
or another agency to take
that forward is really frustrated currently.
And if we are looking at a modern cities, um, with good
transport and other placemaking features that really needs
to have these, um, abilities
to undertake that within the act.
Um, so yeah, overall we support it.
Uh, we do think, um, ways to get the process started.
Um, we understand local authorities are able to get
through the process a bit quicker
that we are government authorities with, um,
for looking at infrastructure, then have to pass on their
purchase requirements to Lins.
There can be some delays there.
We also think there should be, um, good support for Lins
and for other mechanisms.
I mentioned the fairway resolution model to ensure
that owners do actually understand, uh, all the provisions,
um, what's available, what guidance is to support them
through this process because yeah,
we do acknowledge this is quite a traumatic process
for people to suddenly find themselves.
So thank you. Happy to take
Thanks you so much. Um,
questions about five and a half minutes left.
Are there any questions? Can I ask? No, don't go yet.
I, I, I'll ask. I I just, it feels people could,
should generally ask for this one question.
Okay. Finish minute look.
And it's the issue you've asked about flexibility in the
urban development or flexibility in the urban environment.
Now I acknowledge that's about a different, well,
it's potentially about a different, um, regime,
although you could potentially end up with doing it here.
Mm-hmm. Um, if you've got, if you've a acquired land
through the PWI amended or not, um,
and it's done voluntarily,
I would've thought slightly different than if you've taken
it and the, and the, uh,
and the, um, landowner didn't want it taken.
And then you are using a, an amount of it, uh,
for some purpose, which wasn't the purpose which was taken.
Is there a, a difference in your mind as to how
that should be treated in that way?
And look, I mean the, the residual land may
or may not be of great value,
but if you can use it for urban development,
it's probably got some value left.
Yeah, Absolutely.
Possibly quite significant value. Yeah.
And if it's a voluntary sale, you know, then that is able
to be, um, um, you know, looked at from other purposes
by another authority, um,
that's easier If it's compulsory acquired, that's
where the impediment comes.
And often with urban areas, there's so many different ings
of land, it can be quite difficult in that situation.
You might have one, um, yeah.
One piece that's held out
and then that's, that's residual or part of it.
So yeah, I think just if we are looking
to develop our cities, um, into more pleasant spaces, then
that's a real impediment, um, that we need
to look at to modernize.
I guess the question will be, oh,
every situation's gonna be unique,
but the question might be for the original owners, if, well,
actually I quite like to do the development things
and they've had the land taken
compulsory for a different purpose.
Yeah. That might be challenging. Okay. No other questions?
No, Michelle, thank you very much. Thanks, Michelle.
Thank you. Appreciate your time.
Okay, so we've got,
Uh, we don't do, um,
we're currently calling the next minute
to see if they come, come early.
So the next C is, is
Who? Yeah. Um,
river. Right.
Um, the law association has said they can
come 15 minutes early.
Good. The last summit is pulled out. And
NRA, Uh, yeah.
So Project Henry's gone Before the law
association is online.
They're just waiting for one final member to,
Okay, okay. Right.
Okay. Oh,
Next. So,
Yep. Okay. Right. Okay. Well let's
keep right.
Okay. Thank you
Kia. Can you hear us?
We can hear you, but we cannot see you. Can't see you.
Oh, now we can, now we can see you all. Kiara
Kia. Welcome.
We, we've got you, we've got the, you can only,
while you can only see three of us on the screen,
there are seven members, uh, around the table.
Um, and so we've got your submission.
You can take that as read, uh,
if you want highlight elements.
We always appreciate that.
Uh, and if you can leave for a bit of time
for questions at the end, that's always good.
I'll give you a call at about three minutes to go.
Um, in terms of questions, if you're still,
if you're still presenting, so in your hands.
Um, so my name's Amy Bishop
and I am the environmental manager at,
and I'll just pass across for everyone
to introduce themselves.
Kiara Robert cle, principal advisor,
Grace You, Patricia
chairperson for,
Um, is a mandated I authority from,
and we are opposed to the bill.
The bill continues the harmful legacy
of Public works takings the Public Works
Act One.
Is it meant to be not in 81? Yeah.
1981 does not provide for tei, uh, the historical,
the historical account of the NA claims settlement.
Um, as a testament to land loss
and alienation due to land taken for roading, housing
and railways, uh, the bill removes the right to object
to the environment court.
Um, when the government intends to take land
for critical infrastructure, public works, um,
and owners of protected Maori land,
however, retain the right to object.
Um, we are strongly opposed to the removal of the powers
of the Environment court under the bill.
Um, for everyone in alt, uh,
the Environment Court provides an independent expert check
on the crown's powers to acquire land,
and ensures that taking takings are justified,
transparent and accountable.
Uh, the court would be strongly
hampered in undertaking a fair expert
and independent process across large
projects such as a new highway.
Uh, we are also concerned about the proposed incentive
and recognition payments.
Uh, these payments are likely to cause division
among Maori land owners, um, encouraging the sale
of shared land without, uh, proper consultation.
Um, so at this point now, I would like to, um,
just pass over to, uh, Patricia Grace, who is an,
um, so able to,
Um, just a, a bit of a personal experience.
Um, in 2014, I went
before the Environment Court having lodged, um,
an appeal against the proposed taken
by the Public Works Act of
ancestral land, which I own.
And why can I, I was pretty nervous at the
prospect of giving evidence, not knowing what to expect
or whether my evidence would hold up, you know, whether
I'd be able to carry, convey what I wish to put across.
I was presenting mainly oral evidence.
However, when it was my turn to present, I did feel
that I was listened to by the court that I was heard
that the traditions handed down to, to our family
regarding the land.
We were given full consideration as were,
and the historical and cultural significance
of the UA in question.
The court found it relevant that my
URA had already been most generous in the past
and granting land to the wana community, for example,
for housing, for schools, for church, for post
office, but also he was generous in giving to the nation.
He had donated a stretch of land through
for the main trunk railway line.
The Environment Court concluded that the taking of my piece
of land by the Public Works Act would not,
I quote, be fair, sound,
or reasonably necessary.
And our case was successful.
I, but if I
hadn't had access to the Environment Court, the taking
of my land by PWA would
therefore have been unfair.
It would've been not sound not soundly based,
which was dejavu really.
Um, it also would not have been reasonably
necessary given
that there were alternatives that had not been
adequately considered by NZTA.
To be able to go
to the Environment Court was extremely important to me
in my bid to protect
and historical site. Thank
You. Uh, in summary,
uh, I strongly opposed to the bill,
uh, and environment, court rights should be retained for all
and harmful incentive payments should be removed.
Uh,
Got, we've got about four and a bit minutes
for, um, for questions.
Uh, does anybody wanna kick us off?
And, and Patricia, thank you very much for, particularly
for your, um, uh, that your, the story there as I was sort
of aware of it in the history there.
But, uh, thank you, uh, Julianne.
Kiara. Kiara, thank you for your submission.
Patricia, I just wanted to comment on the, um,
how strong sharing your personal story is in this forum,
and I think it really, really makes real
what the consequences will be in the future if
this legislation passes.
So, thank you.
Two questions from me.
Um, the first one of them is, Patricia, you said
that there were alternatives, uh, which I,
and I'm looking at the alignment of the,
what's the capital expressway now quite clearly,
it's quite a broad plane of land,
so there were clearly going to be quite a, a number
of different ways in which the road could have been rooted.
Do you think that had the court not been the, the
decision maker that that would've,
there would've been clearly some other decision maker
that they would not have paid any attention to
the alternatives and thought about a
different, a different routing?
Yes. They already hadn't paid any attention.
I think, you know, different routes were, were, um,
different ways of doing it were put forward to them,
but they kept, uh, wanting to take my land.
One of them was enormously expensive.
One of the alternatives, I can't quite remember
what the other one was, but, um, they weren't impossible.
Um, and oh,
and the third one was, um, going round, which they,
which they did in the end went round my land
and had to build, um,
retaining rules against, yeah,
So, so in, in some cases there'll be more alternatives
than, than there will in others, obviously,
but it, other two key things.
'cause the two key things we are hearing, I think are, um,
the, an independent decision maker, um,
and the ability to, um, to be face-to-face kano, uh, kanoi
is, is are those two key elements that are
not in the bill as it stands at the moment?
I'm sorry, could you help me, Robert? Yes. No, that,
That, that's correct.
We, we would agree with you there, that lack
of independence, uh, the environment court is independence
and having that lack of judicial, um,
oversight is a concern for everybody.
Yeah. Okay. Right. Are there any other questions?
No, No. Look, that's very, very clear.
We really appreciate that. And thank you again, Patricia,
for telling, um, you, us, uh, your story and, and,
and, uh, your experience.
It's very helpful. No, Mehi. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay. We are, so River has pulled out, pulled out.
Um, we've called the law association.
They're waiting for one person to finish the meeting
and they'll join as soon as they are.
Okay. And is that, it is,
So that's us.
So, um, stretch
Time. We, we
may be a little bit earlier.
We, yeah,
Just overall Carlos is won,
supporting the fish in Germany anymore,
Right?
Greeting Phil. Hello.
You look as say you're, um, you're
definitely in transit somewhere. Uh, no, no,
I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm definitely stationary.
I just had to take my Persian cats to the vet
and I could only get a five o'clock slot,
so they very kindly shuffled me through quickly, so.
Oh, very good. Well, well done. Thank you for that.
We've got your submission, so you can take that
as red if you wanna highlight any particular, um, elements.
That's always, always good.
Um, I'll let you know when there's four minutes
to go if you haven't got to finish presenting at that point,
because it's always good for us to ask some questions,
um, of you.
So, um, the time is yours.
Sure. I, I suppose the best thing might be for me
to give some background in that I've worked in, uh,
public work space for, uh, uh, probably 20,
30 years, and including acting for, um, local
and central government requiring authorities and, um,
and then laterally, uh, acting mainly
for landowners and business owners.
So I've got, got quite a good feel for
how the land acquisition part of,
of the legislation works in, in practice
and how it affects my, my clients.
Um, and, and I and I,
and obviously I've got some ideas
about how it can be improved.
Um, um, but I, I think what I was hoping
for maybe at some stage was that the 1981 Act would be, um,
replaced with a, with a new piece of legislation.
Um, but I guess it's not, um, it's not entirely broken, so
that may not be needed, I suppose.
But, um, what I've noticed over the years is
that there has been an improvement in the way
my landowner clients are treated.
Uh, and obviously we've gone from the $2,000 additional, um,
compensation up to a maximum I think, of 50,000.
And, and I think that's been quite well received.
And generally I think landowners are being, uh,
treated a little, uh, quite a bit better.
So, um, that's sort of just introductory.
I think the main takeaway I got from looking at the, uh,
proposed bill is, um, just the, uh,
it would, because we're a public law committee
that we are representing here, um, there's, there's always,
um, a concern when it appears as though the judicial
options or the court options for objecting
or submitting on a, on a process
or a project, uh, are being taken away
and substituted for something else.
Um, so I think that was the,
I think my submission hope hopefully reflected that.
Um, I guess of the thousand, maybe that's overstating it,
but it feels like a thousand.
It's probably about 5% of my work, I guess.
Um, maybe a thousand of these I've done,
and not one of my clients has ever gone
anywhere near the Environment court, uh,
except maybe a couple of clients early on, uh, trying
to object to a notice of requirement.
And I think we've only ever been
to the land valuation tribunal once, so I'm just wondering
how much information you've got, uh,
or what sort of data you've got there, which shows that
the court process might be slowing down.
Um, you know, the acquisition side of things and,
and making, making it slower and
therefore making the project maybe, um, take longer to get,
get, get underway and, and maybe cost more
because it's not been my experience.
Most of my clients really can't, uh, they,
they often can't afford to, to take the court option.
I, I guess, um, so I'm wondering whether that one's more,
it's not likely to be in, in terms
of the critical infrastructure stage,
but it might be more people looking to go to court
to get a position to object to a notice of requirement.
Uh, and I, and I guess the other, the other critique
that we had was, if you're removing the right to appeal
to the environment court, I'm surely not the first person
to say this today, but, um, the option
of making submissions to the minister,
and if I've got this right, it,
it could well be the minister
or the local government, local authority that's a proponent
for the particular project.
So you're actually submitting
and objecting to the, you know, the minister's project
or the, um, local government's project.
And it feels as though the right to go to the court
and get the proper judicial processes gone.
And also you're likely to be going, you're likely
to be making your submissions
and your objections to someone that's,
that's potentially conflicted.
Um, and um, I'm,
I'm actually pro good infrastructure project, so it is,
this is just the, just my, um,
and my colleague sort of reaction to the removal of the ju
judicial process and supplementing it with the submission
to a minister where potentially their
interest in the project might override any, uh, you know,
any impartiality I suppose.
Or there might be even a perception of impart, of a lack
of impartiality in
that process process.
So I think that was the main point
that, that we wanted to make.
Um, so if you've got any questions
or you wanted to respond to that in any way, uh,
because I may, I, I mean, I must, I must confess
I looked at it very quickly
and I, I, I spent several hours looking through it,
but I could have overlooked something
or may have missed some aspects of it.
Look, Phil, um, thank you very much for that.
Uh, I'll check to see what, uh, questions there might be my,
my colleagues, um, before I take a couple questions.
Right. Okay. Well, I I will do that. Um, we thank you.
Look, thank you for bringing the, the I point about data
because actually I don't think we've actually had
that from anybody so far.
So that's useful. And that's something which we will ask
for information, um, about in terms of the, the number
of people who actually do go to the environment court, um,
and the relationships with the, uh, with the notice, um,
of requirement.
Um, just on, you've made a comment there,
um, on key section about protected Maori land.
I just wonder if you could spell out this, um, in your 11 D.
So the definition of protected Maori land in section 11
of the Infrastructure Financing Act includes previously held
Maori free old land that has cease to have
that status in accordance with any order
of the Maori land court.
If an order has been made over such land, then
that land should not have protected status.
Can you just walk us through
what that actually is all about?
That was my colleague's point.
Um, so that was Nick Kearney, I think, who,
who, who made that point.
And I, I wonder whether he's, he's, um, coming from the,
I'm not sure he is coming from the perspective of whether
Maori land should be, should,
should be treated any different differently
where it's critical infrastructure. Um,
Well, well I, I, I took what was being said there
as being at one stage it was protected,
and then there's a order of the Maori land court,
which makes it not protected anymore.
I, I mean, that's not a process I'm familiar with
or what circumstances that might apply.
I think you can, you can apply
to have Maori land converted into general land.
Uh, I guess the reasons why people do that sometimes it, it,
it's, it's easier to develop the land, easier to get, uh,
ka borrow money against it if it's general land
because of the limited ability to, um,
alienate Maori land.
It makes it less appealing for lenders sometimes.
So I'm, I'm not sure,
but if, if it became general land, I guess it would then
be subject to the same, um, you know, the same fast track
process and the same, um, you know,
submission and, uh, process.
Um, whereas I think you are trying to exempt Maori land from
that fast track processes that, is that right?
Well, I think it's the issue of the def what of
what actually is the definition of Maori land in this,
in this instance, if it's, it was
and now it isn't anymore in that.
Well, I think as soon as it's general land,
it's no longer Maori land, so,
Okay. Uh,
I don't, I'd have to check with Nick.
I, I don't, I don't really actually see that as
Okay. I
personally didn't see that as important. Okay.
Uh, that important. And the main thing for us,
I think was the removal of the ability
to at least go before a court.
And I guess the only way you could get
to a court now would be to require a judicial review of the
way that the submissions
and the objection process proceeded and the outcome of that
Look. The other
question I wanted to ask is,
you said you've acted both central government
and local government and for landowners, um,
I'm just interested in your observations around the, uh,
the emotional process for, um, for landowners and,
and so, you know, whether it's good, bad or indifferent.
You said it is, it's improved over the years.
Can you just fill us in a little bit on, on that please?
Uh, I think every landowner I deal with, um,
uh, they're um, they're, they're usually devastated
by the fact that they're, they, they're very, they, they're,
they're often as we all are very, very attached
to their piece of land and their home and,
and all the stuff that they've done over the years there
and the family and the, and,
and the effort to keep the, you know,
the property going and all that.
And so they're quite, they're,
they're very heavily invested, obviously, as you would be,
and that their major asset.
And so when it does, when it, when, when it's,
it's always a shock when they, you know,
even though they know there might be a project, um,
it's always a shock when they're approached
by the accredited supplier for their, you know,
for the first couple of meetings to talk them
through the process of the land actually being taken.
And often, often it's hard for them to see another, um,
an opportunity to get a substitute property, which,
you know, will replace what they've already got.
And, um, they don't often understand the process.
So it's really important, I think
that they get proper legal representation from someone who's
actually opened the Public Works Act
and familiar with all the ins and and outs of it.
And, uh, I think that does alleviate the stress
to some extent once they've got, uh,
once they've got a lawyer that knows the ins
and outs of the process and can take away the front facing,
dealing with the accredit supplier
and land information New Zealand and Transport Agency
or Auckland Transport or water care or, or whoever.
Um, and I,
and I think that, um,
it's a hugely emotional situation.
Um, and, and,
and I only sort of, it's only when I tell 'em about
what their rights are, and they may have already heard
this from the accredit supplier.
It's only when I tell 'em, I'm on your side.
I've been through this mul multiple times, I know how
to get you the maximum compensation that you're entitled
to under the public works.
This is how it's gonna, this is how it's gonna progress
that we've got valuers who are experienced at valuing land.
And the other ju the other issue obviously is always, I,
I mean obviously I think my properties are worth more than,
than what they probably are.
And, and often where the, where,
where traditionally big issues have been is
that the valuation
that the crown gets is often significantly lower than the
valuation that the landowner gets.
And that's where a lot of tension comes in
because you're trying to argue between the two valuations.
And so I guess I'd be a proponent
for saying well get one valuation from a, a reputable, uh,
and very competent and experienced valuer in that space
and run with that
because there's case law that says
that the government agencies shouldn't be nakedly.
I think the word nakedly must have
been an old case, I think.
And if there's any doubt about the value of the property,
then you should, um, you should, um,
settle generously in favor of the hire
of the two valuations.
And I think that could be written into the Public Works Act.
I think that would be good. And, um, what, what I perceive
as a taxpayer is that these people are taking a hit
for the greater good of the community.
So, um, they, they deserve to be looked
after in a very, um, almost a Rolls Royce sort
of red carpet fashion.
Um, and, and so over the years I've seen valuations,
very low valuations, the government have got high
valuations, uh, higher valuations for the landowner
that leads to delays of months
and months while you work out, well, what's it really worth?
And you, you try and reach an agreement on that
and, um, arguments over legal fees and valuation fees
and is that reasonable and should we pay for it?
And, and basically my clients used to get, maybe not
so much now, but they still do to some extent get nickel
and dimmed over legal fees and valuation fees
and, uh, you know, a hundred thousand dollars difference
between the two valuation reports.
Um, and instead of having a client that, or a landowner
or a taxpayer that might have felt the process was fear
and reasonable, you've got one that feels
that they've been done over twice and um,
and shortchanged at the other end.
And, um, so you're more likely to have litigants
and you're more likely to have delays.
You're more likely to have a project
that doesn't get started on time
and it gets built, you know, you know, delays and delays
and delays, adds to the cost and so on and so forth.
So it's kind of like a false economy. Yeah,
I guess so. Thank you.
I think actually that's, I, I let to,
to let you go on that one, but it's, um,
but I think that's very valuable
'cause we haven't had really had anybody else
yet who's spoken to us about the, that bit of the process,
uh, the client, but,
and also some of those issues around the valuation process.
So thank you. We really appreciate that.
Thanks for your time. Thank very much. Thank you. Okay.
You're welcome. Alright. Look after those
Will do.